Add EIP-5023: Shareable non-transferable non-fungible token (#5023)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-5023.md

---
eip: 5023

> title: Shareable non-transferable non-fungible token standard

Author: Thank you for your comments! I'll incorporate this suggestion.

description: A standard interface for shareable non-transferable NFTs
author: Jarno Marttila (@yaruno), Martin Moravek (@mmartinmo)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/new-nft-concept-shareable-nfts/8681
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2022-01-28
requires: 165
---

## Abstract

This standard allows creation of tokens that can hold value, but cannot be exchanged for rival goods such as money, cryptocurrencies or other goods that hold monetary value. Shareability of tokens can be understood as re-minting of a token for a new recipient e.g. by making a copy of the token and by giving it away while retaining the original one. The sharing and its associated events allow construction of a graph describing who has shared what to which party.

## Motivation

> Traditional NFT standards such as ERC-721 and ERC-1155 have been developed to introduce artificial digital scarcity and to capture rival value. NFT standards and implementations don't necessarily have to be exhibit scarcity and in certain use cases such as in ATARCA project we wish to avoid introduction of deliberate scarcity. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Traditional NFT standards such as ERC-721 and ERC-1155 have been developed to introduce artificial digital scarcity and to capture rival value. NFT standards and implementations don't necessarily have to exhibit scarcity and in certain use cases such as in ATARCA project we wish to avoid introduction of deliberate scarcity. 
```

Typical NFT standards such as ERC-721 and ERC-1155 do not define a sharing modality. Instead ERC standards define user interfaces for typical rival use cases such as token minting and token transactions that the NFT contract implementations should fulfil. The ‘standard’ contract implementations may extend the functionalities beyond the definition of interfaces. The tokens developed in the ATARCA experiments are designed to be token standard compatible at the interface level. However the implementation of token contracts may contain extended functionalities to match the requirements of the experiments such as the requirement of 'shareability'. In reflection to standard token definitions, shareability of a token could be thought of as re-mintability of an existing token. Contracts define re-mintable non-transferable tokens which retain some reference to previous tokens upon and after re-minting.

## Specification

The key words “MUST”, “MUST NOT”, “REQUIRED”, “SHALL”, “SHALL NOT”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “RECOMMENDED”, “MAY”, and “OPTIONAL” in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

> 

Reviewer: Please also include the EIP-165 interface id.

Author: Good suggestion! I'll incorporate.

```solidity

> interface IERCsntNFT is IERC165 {

Reviewer: This interface name is alphabet soup. I'd suggest reworking it a bit to make it more readable.

Author: Good catch! I've renamed interface to IERC5023.

  event Share(address indexed from, address indexed to, uint256 indexed tokenId, uint256 derivedFromtokenId);

  /// @dev Shares, remints an existing token, gives a newly minted token a fresh token id, keeps original token at function callers possession and transfers newly minted token to receiver which should be another address than function caller. 
  function share(address to, uint256 tokenIdToBeShared, uint256 newTokenId) external virtual;

} 
```

## Rationale

Current NFT standards define transferable non-fungible tokens. However to be able to create shareable NFTs we see that existing NFT contracts could be extended with an interface which defines the basic principles of sharing, namely the Event of sharing and the function method of sharing. In ATARCA we have chosen to go with shareable non-transferable NFTs which in our use case denote an award or merit for done effort. 

Shareable tokens can be transferable or non-transferable as it is up to implementation details of the token contract. In the reference implementation we have a general case distilled from the ATARCA case that defines a shareable non-transferable NFTs using the shareable NFT interface.

> 

Reviewer: A quick blurb about why you don't have any of the standard token functions (like `ownerOf`, for example) would be useful. Do you expect implementers to also implement another standard alongside this one, like `ERC721` from EIP-721, for example?

Author: Excellent question @SamWilsn! A short answer would be yes, we expect that users would extend their ERC token implementations e.g. ERC-721 or ERC-1155 with this interface given that they want to make them shareable.

A lengthier answer is that we've been tackling the concept of shareability and shareable tokens for a while now and what we have noticed is that depending on the context shareability can take different forms, and one might use different types implementations for shareable tokens. Hence we haven't restricted that the interface must fulfil a specific token type. Though to add to that, in our use cases we have mostly been working with non-fungible token standards such as ERC-721 tokens, but we've also found some use for the ERC-1155 nft tokens. 

What I personally think is that the wider audience would greatly benefit from an abstraction level higher definition for shareability, such as this interface implementation, that defines minimum amount of functions that would be implemented to satisfy shareability. 

Let me know what you think. Any feedback is highly appreciated.

Reviewer: I think that's good information, and could be added to the Rationale section.

Author: Excellent, I'll incorporate the gist to the rationale section.

  }
    
  function _baseURI() internal view override returns (string memory) {
        return baseURI;
  }

  function share(address to, uint256 tokenIdToBeShared, uint256 newTokenId) external virtual {
      require(to != address(0), "ERC721: mint to the zero address");
      require(_exists(tokenIdToBeShared), "ShareableERC721: token to be shared must exist");
      require(!_exists(newTokenId), "token with given id already exists");
      
      require(msg.sender == ownerOf(tokenIdToBeShared), "Method caller must be the owner of token");

      string memory _tokenURI = tokenURI(tokenIdToBeShared);
      _mint(to, newTokenId);
      _setTokenURI(newTokenId, _tokenURI);

      emit Share(msg.sender, to, newTokenId, tokenIdToBeShared);
  }

  function transferFrom(
        address from,
        address to,
        uint256 tokenId
    ) public virtual override {
        revert('In this reference implementation tokens are not transferrable');
    }

    function safeTransferFrom(
        address from,
        address to,
        uint256 tokenId
    ) public virtual override {
        revert('In this reference implementation tokens are not transferrable');
    }

> }

Reviewer: Are you missing `supportsInterface`?

Author: Use of supportsInterface is implied. I can add it to the reference implementation if you find it useful.

Reviewer: Could add a `/* EIP155 */` comment in the `contract ... is` line?

```
## Security Considerations

TBD

## Copyright

> Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE).
```

Author: Thank you for you suggestion! New linking style seems to be introduced at https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/5055. I'll incorporate your changes to PR.

---
eip: 5023

> title: Shareable non-transferable non-fungible token

Reviewer: ```
error[preamble-len-title]: preamble header `title` value is too long (max 44)
 --> /home/sam/Code/EIPs/EIPS/eip-5023.md:3:7
  |
3 | title: Shareable non-transferable non-fungible token
  |       ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ too long
  |
```

Author: Updated in the PR.

> title: Shareable non-transferable non-fungible token

Reviewer 3: For now there is a 44 letter length limit.  

@yaruno if you are still pursuing this EIP, can you leverage the EIP Walidator's warning for to make it conform to the latest EIP editorial requirement?

Author: Yes, we are still pursuing this EIP. I'll check the EIP validator warnings and update the PR accordingly.

> description: An interface for shareable non-transferable NFTs

Reviewer: This description is repeating the title a bit too closely. What is a shareable non-transferable NFT? Maybe something like:

```suggestion
description: Interface for value-holding tokens that are shared by multiple owners instead of transferred
```

Author: Updated in the PR.

author: Jarno Marttila (@yaruno), Martin Moravek (@mmartinmo)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/new-nft-concept-shareable-nfts/8681
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2022-01-28
requires: 165
---

## Abstract

This standard allows creation of tokens that can hold value, but cannot be exchanged for rival goods such as money, cryptocurrencies or other goods that hold monetary value. Shareability of tokens can be understood as re-minting of a token for a new recipient e.g. by making a copy of the token and by giving it away while retaining the original one. The sharing and its associated events allow construction of a graph describing who has shared what to which party.

## Motivation

> Traditional NFT standards such as ERC-721 and ERC-1155 have been developed to introduce artificial digital scarcity and to capture rival value. NFT standards and implementations don't necessarily have to exhibit scarcity and in certain use cases such as in ATARCA project we wish to avoid introduction of deliberate scarcity. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Traditional NFT standards such as ERC-721 and ERC-1155 have been developed to introduce artificial digital scarcity and to capture rival value. NFT standards and implementations don't necessarily have to exhibit scarcity and in certain use cases, such as in the ATARCA project, it's preferable to avoid the introduction of deliberate scarcity.
```
Please don't use first person pronouns in EIPs.

Author: Thank you for your suggestion! I'll incorporate this to the PR.

> Traditional NFT standards such as ERC-721 and ERC-1155 have been developed to introduce artificial digital scarcity and to capture rival value. NFT standards and implementations don't necessarily have to exhibit scarcity and in certain use cases, such as in the ATARCA project, it's preferable to avoid the introduction of deliberate scarcity.

Reviewer: First mention to another EIP must be linked, and use `EIP-*` format.

```suggestion
Traditional NFT standards such as [EIP-721](./eip-721.md) and [EIP-1155](./eip-1155.md) have been developed to introduce artificial digital scarcity and to capture rival value. NFT standards and implementations don't necessarily have to exhibit scarcity and in certain use cases, such as in the ATARCA project, it's preferable to avoid the introduction of deliberate scarcity.
```

> In ATARCA project we attempt to capture positive externalities in ecosystems with new types of incentive mechanisms that exhibit anti-rival logic, serve as an unit of accounting and function as medium of sharing. We envision that shareable tokens can work both as incentives but also as representations of items that are typically digital in their nature and gain more value as they are shared.

Reviewer 4: Generally it's best to not refer to your own project in an EIP, rather focus on the solution the EIP provides.

Author: Fair point, I'll remove specific references to ATARCA project.

These requirements have set us to define shareable non-transferable NFTs. These shareable NFTs can be “shared” in the same way digital goods can be shared, at an almost zero technical transaction cost. They are used to instantiate quantified anti-rival value, a medium of sharing. Hence, they work somewhat as money, being a store of value and a unit of account, but instead of being a medium of exchange, they are a medium of sharing.

> Typical NFT standards such as ERC-721 and ERC-1155 do not define a sharing modality. Instead ERC standards define user interfaces for typical rival use cases such as token minting and token transactions that the NFT contract implementations should fulfil. The ‘standard’ contract implementations may extend the functionalities beyond the definition of interfaces. The tokens developed in the ATARCA experiments are designed to be token standard compatible at the interface level. However the implementation of token contracts may contain extended functionalities to match the requirements of the experiments such as the requirement of 'shareability'. In reflection to standard token definitions, shareability of a token could be thought of as re-mintability of an existing token. Contracts define re-mintable non-transferable tokens which retain some reference to previous tokens upon and after re-minting.

Reviewer: ```
error[markdown-re-eip-not-erc]: proposals must be referenced with the form `EIP-N` (not `ERC-N`)
  --> /home/sam/Code/EIPs/EIPS/eip-5023.md
   |
26 | Typical NFT standards such as ERC-721 and ERC-1155 do not define a sharing modality. Instead ERC standards define user interfaces for typical rival use cases such as token minting and token transactions that the NFT contract implementations should fulfil. The ‘standard’ contract implementations may extend the functionalities beyond the definition of interfaces. The tokens developed in the ATARCA experiments are designed to be token standard compatible at the interface level. However the implementation of token contracts may contain extended functionalities to match the requirements of the experiments such as the requirement of 'shareability'. In reflection to standard token definitions, shareability of a token could be thought of as re-mintability of an existing token. Contracts define re-mintable non-transferable tokens which retain some reference to previous tokens upon and after re-minting.
   |
   = info: the pattern in question: `(?i)erc[\s-]*[0-9]+`
```

Author: Updated in the PR.

## Specification

The key words “MUST”, “MUST NOT”, “REQUIRED”, “SHALL”, “SHALL NOT”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “RECOMMENDED”, “MAY”, and “OPTIONAL” in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

```solidity
///  Note: the ERC-165 identifier for this interface is 0xd763f0cf
interface IERC5023 is IERC165 {

>   /// @dev This emits when a token is shared, reminted and given to another wallet that isn't function caller

Reviewer: I'd expand a bit (outside of the code block) when the `Share` event is emitted.

Author: I'll add a brief clarification of when Share event is expected to be emitted.

  event Share(address indexed from, address indexed to, uint256 indexed tokenId, uint256 derivedFromtokenId);

  /// @dev Shares, remints an existing token, gives a newly minted token a fresh token id, keeps original token at function callers possession and transfers newly minted token to receiver which should be another address than function caller. 
  function share(address to, uint256 tokenIdToBeShared, uint256 newTokenId) external;

} 
```

## Rationale

> Current NFT standards define transferable non-fungible tokens. However to be able to create shareable NFTs we see that existing NFT contracts could be extended with an interface which defines the basic principles of sharing, namely the Event of sharing and the function method of sharing. In ATARCA we have chosen to go with shareable non-transferable NFTs which in our use case denote an award or merit for done effort. 

Reviewer: This section reads like motivation (because it's describing why the EIP as a whole exists.) The Rationale section is meant to explain technical choices within the EIP itself. For example, you might want to describe why `share` takes `newTokenId` as a parameter, and isn't a return value.

Author: Updated in the PR.

> Shareable tokens can be transferable or non-transferable as it is up to implementation details of the token contract. In the reference implementation we have a general case distilled from the ATARCA case that defines a shareable non-transferable NFTs using the shareable NFT interface.

Reviewer: > Shareable tokens can be transferable or non-transferable

The title says non-transferable, so either this paragraph needs to be updated or the title does.

Author: Good point, I'll update the title and text accordingly. The idea behind the EIP is that the suggested interface gives the lowest common denominator for creating shareable tokens and in the end it's up to the implementors if they want to make them non-transferable or not. We've ended up making our shareable tokens non-transferable to fit our particular use case though.

## Backwards Compatibility

TBD

## Reference Implementation

Following reference implementation demonstrates a general use case of one of our pilots. In this case a shareable non-transferable token represents a contribution done to a community that the contract owner has decided to merit with a token. Contract owner can mint a merit token and give it to a person. This token can be further shared by the receiver to other parties for example to share the received merit to others that have participated or influenced his contribution.

```

> // SPDX-License-Identifier: CC0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// SPDX-License-Identifier: CC0-1.0
```

Should come from [this list](https://spdx.org/licenses/).

---
eip: 5023
title: Shareable non-transferable non-fungible token standard
description: A standard interface for shareable non-transferable NFTs

> author: ATARCA team

Reviewer 5: The format of author  should  be  changed.  
reference:  https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/master/eip-template.md

discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/new-nft-concept-shareable-nfts/8681
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2022-01-28
requires: 165
---

## Abstract

> The following defines a standard interface for shareable tokens used in [ATARCA project](https://atarca.eu/) (Grant agreement 964678) to create shareable non-transferable non-fungible tokens. The standard allows creation of tokens that can hold value, but cannot be exchanged for rival goods such as money, cryptocurrencies or other goods that hold monetary value. Shareability of tokens can be understood as re-minting of a token for a new recipient e.g. by making a copy of the token and by giving it away while retaining the original one. The sharing and its associated events allow construction of a graph describing who has shared what to which party.

Reviewer 6: No external links, and the abstract should be terse.  Also in general it is frowned on to reference specific products/platforms in a standard, as it should be agnostic to any specific application.
```suggestion
This standard allows creation of tokens that can hold value, but cannot be exchanged for rival goods such as money, cryptocurrencies or other goods that hold monetary value. Shareability of tokens can be understood as re-minting of a token for a new recipient e.g. by making a copy of the token and by giving it away while retaining the original one. The sharing and its associated events allow construction of a graph describing who has shared what to which party.
```

Typical NFT standards such as ERC-721 and ERC-1155 do not define a sharing modality. Instead ERC standards define user interfaces for typical rival use cases such as token minting and token transactions that the NFT contract implementations should fulfil. The ‘standard’ contract implementations may extend the functionalities beyond the definition of interfaces. The tokens developed in the ATARCA experiments are designed to be token standard compatible at the interface level. However the implementation of token contracts may contain extended functionalities to match the requirements of the experiments such as the requirement of 'shareability'. In reflection to standard token definitions, shareability of a token could be thought of as re-mintability of an existing token. Contracts define re-mintable non-transferable tokens which retain some reference to previous tokens upon and after re-minting.

## Specification

The key words “MUST”, “MUST NOT”, “REQUIRED”, “SHALL”, “SHALL NOT”, “SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “RECOMMENDED”, “MAY”, and “OPTIONAL” in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119.

```solidity

> import "@openzeppelin/contracts/utils/introspection/IERC165.sol";
> 

Reviewer 6: The sure can use whatever ERC-165 implementation they want, this specific one isn't required and thus shouldn't be included in the specification.
```suggestion
```

Author: Good point, will incorporate this to PR.

Shareable tokens can be transferable or non-transferable as it is up to implementation details of the token contract. In the reference implementation we have a general case distilled from the ATARCA case that defines a shareable non-transferable NFTs using the shareable NFT interface.

## Backwards Compatibility

TBD

## Reference Implementation

Following reference implementation demonstrates a general use case of one of our pilots. In this case a shareable non-transferable token represents a contribution done to a community that the contract owner has decided to merit with a token. Contract owner can mint a merit token and give it to a person. This token can be further shared by the receiver to other parties for example to share the received merit to others that have participated or influenced his contribution.

```

> // SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT

Reviewer 6: Should be CC0 licensed (as the whole EIP is CC0).

Author: Good catch! Will incorporate the updated licence in next commit.

---
eip: 5023
title: Shareable non-fungible token

> description: An interface for creating value-holding tokens that can be shared by multiple owners instead of transferring

Author: That sounds good! I'll incorporate this to PR.

author: Jarno Marttila (@yaruno), Martin Moravek (@mmartinmo)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/new-nft-concept-shareable-nfts/8681
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2022-01-28
requires: 165
---

## Abstract

This standard allows creation of tokens that can hold value and that can be shared. Shareability of tokens can be understood as re-minting of a token for a new recipient e.g. by making a copy of the token and by giving it away while retaining 'the original one'. The sharing and its associated events allow construction of a graph describing who has shared what to which party. 

This EIP defines an interoperable interface that fulfils the concept of shareable of tokens and demonstrates the application of it through a reference implementation.

## Motivation

> Traditional NFT standards such as [EIP-721](./eip-721.md) and [EIP-1155](./eip-1155.md) have been developed to introduce artificial digital scarcity and to capture rival value. NFT standards and implementations don't necessarily have to exhibit scarcity and in certain use cases it's preferable to avoid the introduction of deliberate scarcity.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NFT standards such as [EIP-721](./eip-721.md) and [EIP-1155](./eip-1155.md) have been developed to standardize scarce digital resources. However, many non-fungible digital resources need not be scarce.
```
